scratch example ideas
=====================

There is a companion list at pyncraft/examples/todo.txt for the Python side,
and it is deliberately not this list. Its organising idea is "take a real
professional library, get coordinates out of it, turn those into blocks" --
astronomy, terrain, proteins. Scratch cannot win that game and should not try:
anything that is really a data pipeline is better written in Python.

What Scratch has that Python does not is SENSES AND A STAGE. A microphone. A
camera. Sprites you can drag. Cloud variables shared between two children in
two different houses. A keyboard being pressed right now. And, through
`getHit`, a Minecraft world that can press keys back.

So the shape of a good Scratch example is:

    something happening in the room  ->  something happening in the world

and the best ones run both ways. That is a thing this project can do which
essentially nothing else can, and almost none of the fourteen examples in
scratch/examples currently do it -- they are turtle geometry, which is lovely,
and which Python could do just as well.

Rough effort/payoff is one person's guess.


0. THE SHARED PIECE, worth building first
-----------------------------------------
The extension sends twelve distinct commands out of the fifty the server
understands, and `world.setBlocks` is not one of them. Every block placed from
Scratch is its own round trip.

This is the same finding the Python list opened with, and the fix there was
worth more than every example after it: pyncraft grew `buildVoxels`, and a
274,000 block landscape went from impossible to thirty-three seconds. Scratch
never got the equivalent, so a Scratch project that wants a wall builds it one
block at a time over the network, and everybody learns that Minecraft-from-
Scratch is slow.

Wanted, roughly in order of how much they unlock:

    fill from (x y z) to (x y z) with [block]   world.setBlocks
    set sign at (x y z) [line 1..4]             world.setSign, setWallSign
    remove entity (id)                          entity.remove
    point player towards (x y z)                player.setDirection
    switch to world [name] / world list         world.setWorld, getWorlds
    explosion at (x y z) power (n)              world.createExplosion
    set health / food                           player.setHealth, setFoodLevel
    show title [text]                           player.sendTitle

`setBlocks` is most of the value. `setSign` is second, because a build nobody
can label is a build nobody can explain, and every idea below wants labels.

Effort: low -- the server already does all of it, this is extension plumbing.
Payoff: unlocks everything else, and makes what already exists faster.


1. THE MICROPHONE
-----------------
Scratch reports loudness as a number between 0 and 100, with no setup, no
permission dialog beyond the browser's, and no library. Point it at a room full
of children and it is the most immediate input any of them have ever had.

  - A tower that grows while you shout and stops when you stop. Ten seconds
    from starting the project to a child understanding a loop.
  - A landscape whose hills are the last thirty seconds of noise in the room:
    a chart of the lesson, that you can walk on.
  - Clap to place. Loudness over a threshold drops a block at the turtle.
  - A room-volume meter on a wall, in coloured concrete, updating live.

The first of these is probably the single best beginner example this project
could ship. It is four blocks long and it is astonishing.

Effort: very low. Payoff: very high. Do this one first.


2. THE CAMERA
-------------
Scratch's video sensing reports motion and direction in any region of the
stage. That is a gesture sensor for nothing.

  - Wave left and right to steer the turtle; it draws where you wave.
  - A wall of blocks mirroring the motion grid, so you paint by moving.
  - Jump to build up, crouch to build down.

Worth knowing the limits before promising too much: it reports motion, not
where your hands are, so it is a good "something moved over here" sensor and a
poor skeleton tracker. Also it wants a webcam and permission, which in a school
is sometimes a conversation.

Effort: low. Payoff: high, with caveats.


3. THE STAGE AS A PLAN VIEW
---------------------------
The thing Scratch has that no Python script has is a two dimensional drawing
surface with sprites you can pick up and move.

  - Drag a sprite on the stage, and a marker moves in the world to match. Now
    the stage is a map of the build site.
  - Draw with the Scratch pen, then extrude what you drew into the world: the
    stage becomes a floor plan and the world becomes the house.
  - Two sprites, and the world builds a road between them.

The pen version is the good one. Drawing a shape and then walking around
inside it, at scale, is a genuinely startling first experience of what
coordinates mean.

Effort: medium -- needs `setBlocks` (see 0) or it is unbearably slow.
Payoff: very high.


4. MINECRAFT AS THE INPUT, NOT THE OUTPUT
-----------------------------------------
`getHit` already exists: hit a block with a sword and Scratch finds out. That
inverts the whole relationship and almost nothing uses it.

  - A piano. Build twelve blocks, hit them, Scratch plays the notes. Scratch
    already has instruments and pitch, so the sound is free.
  - A quiz buzzer: the question is on the stage, the answers are blocks, and
    you run to the one you think is right.
  - A light switch, a doorbell, a combination lock. Three blocks in the right
    order opens the door.
  - A drum machine: a row of blocks is a bar, and hitting one toggles it.

Effort: low, and it works today.
Payoff: very high, and it is the most distinctive thing on this list.


5. TWO CHILDREN, TWO HOUSES
---------------------------
Scratch cloud variables sync between everyone running the same project. Two
children on the same Minecraft server, each running Scratch at home, sharing
state through the cloud.

  - Collaborative build: what one places, the other sees.
  - Send a message that appears as a sign in the other one's world.
  - A race: first to reach the marker sets the cloud variable and wins.

Caveats worth stating plainly: cloud variables are numbers only, they are rate
limited, and they need a Scratch account with the project shared, which is a
teacher-and-parent conversation rather than a technical one. Encoding text as
numbers to get round the numbers-only limit is itself a decent lesson.

Effort: medium, mostly non-technical.
Payoff: high, and unlike anything else here.


6. LIVE CONTROL: THE WORLD AS A PLOTTER
---------------------------------------
Arrow keys move the turtle in real time, with the pen down. An Etch A Sketch
the size of a football pitch.

Add `save turtle` / `restore turtle` and you have undo.

Add a costume-per-block palette and you have a paint program whose canvas you
can stand on.

Effort: low. Payoff: medium-high, and it is a good half hour.


7. THE THINGS THAT ARE REALLY MATHS
-----------------------------------
The existing examples are here -- spiral, trefoil knot, 3d wave -- and they are
good. Worth extending, but they are not what makes Scratch special, so they
should not crowd out 1 to 6.

  - L-systems: four rules and a turtle gives you a tree, a fern, a dragon
    curve. Recursion made of wood and leaves.
  - Menger sponge and Sierpinski, which are natural in a cubic world.
  - Cellular automata: Game of Life on a vertical wall, one generation per
    second, running live. Rule 30 grown upward as a tower.
  - A maze generated and then built, so you have to walk out of it.

Effort: low each. Payoff: medium, and they are reliable lesson filler.


8. THE STARTER LADDER
---------------------
Not a project: an ordering. The fourteen examples in scratch/examples have no
sequence and no readme, so a teacher meeting them has to guess which to open.

A numbered path -- hello world, one block, a tower, a loop, the turtle, the
microphone, getHit, your own idea -- with one line each on what is new in it,
is probably worth more classroom time than any single new example.

Effort: low. Payoff: high, and unglamorous.


9. DONE: THE BLOCKS THAT WERE SWITCHED OFF
------------------------------------------
Six /* */ comments in scratch.js hid eighteen block definitions. All of them
are now either in the palette or deleted, and the test asserts that no block
definition is commented out, so this cannot quietly happen again.

Brought back, all seven working as written:

    have [block] at (x y z)     ask what is at a place
    player on [block]           ask what you are standing on
    move player to top          jump to the surface
    turtle save / turtle restore   undo for the turtle
    suspend / resume drawing    collect placements, then send them

One was actually broken and that is why it was hidden: `move player to top`
set the player's y to whatever world.getHeight returned, and getHeight is
Bukkit's getHighestBlockYAt -- the y of the highest block that is NOT air. It
put the player inside the ground rather than on it. Checked against five
places on the live server: y=height is solid every time, y=height+1 is air.

getHit was the same story, fixed a commit earlier: it called this.shift.pop()
where the array is `hits`, so it threw every time a hit arrived.

Deleted rather than revived: a second `spawn entity` block whose entity was a
bare number, duplicating the one with the dropdown. entityMenu now accepts a
reporter instead, so one block does both -- pick from the list, or work the
number out.

Which leaves the lesson rather than the task: a commented out block is worse
than a missing one, because the next person to read the file believes it is
there. Two of these were hidden because they did not work, and hiding them
meant nobody fixed them for years.


10. DONE: WHAT WAS WORTH TAKING FROM THE PREDECESSOR
----------------------------------------------------
arpruss/rjmscratch is where this extension comes from, and the question of
what is left to port has an answer: from the extension itself, nothing.
rjm.js has 31 blocks and all 31 are here, plus sixteen more. The seven brought
back in (9) are exactly his set, which is the tell: this is a fork where the
blocks that did not survive the move to Bukkit were commented out rather than
mended.

His 21 example projects will not transplant. The opcodes differ only by
prefix, but the block VALUES are pre-1.13 numeric ids with data bytes --
"35,9" is cyan wool, "41,0" gold -- and Minecraft deleted those in the 1.13
flattening. Porting one means a translation table. Worth reimplementing by
idea rather than translating, and the ideas worth having are:

    goldify / midasblock   touch a block and it turns to gold (getHit)
    maze                   generate one, build it, walk out of it
    clock                  a working clock
    hilbert / dragon       space filling curves, turtle recursion
    bridge                 build under yourself as you go

Two of his other extensions are now here, MIT, notices kept, bugs fixed:
docs/gamepad.js and docs/fetch.js. See the scratch README.

Which leaves the real gap: fetch.js makes "professional data -> blocks"
possible from Scratch, the way fetch_planet.py did for Python. Live weather
as a landscape, today's earthquakes as towers, sunrise as a day length. Those
are examples nobody has written yet.

Effort: low each. Payoff: high, and unlike anything else in scratch/examples.


NOTES
-----
- Scratch's audience starts younger than pyncraft's. An example that needs a
  paragraph of explanation before it does anything has already lost. The
  microphone tower does something in four blocks.
- Prefer examples that survive a bad network. One round trip per block is
  noticeable on a school connection and miserable on a phone hotspot, which
  is another argument for (0).
- .sb3 files are zip archives containing project.json, so they are diffable if
  anyone writes a generator, and opaque binaries if nobody does. Worth doing
  before there are fifty of them.
- Anything that is really "fetch a dataset and turn it into blocks" belongs in
  pyncraft/examples, not here.
